Add `preserve_range` parameter to `feature.blob_` functions (#7797)
scikit-image/scikit-image: doc/source/user_guide/skimage2_migration.md

scikit-image is preparing to release version 2.0 as a new package: `skimage2`.
Alongside skimage2, we will release version 1.0.0. Versions 1.x will be using the current API.
Versions 1.1.x will throw a `FutureWarning` upon import, as a means to notify users that
they should either upgrade to skimage2 or pin to version 1.0.x.

We have undertaken this to make some long-outstanding, backward-incomptible changes to the scikit-image API.
Most changes were difficult or impossible to make using deprecations alone.

> To honor the Hinsen principle (that is, never change results silently unless to fix a bug), we introduce a new package, which gives users an explicit way of upgrading.

Reviewer: @stefanv yes, this was [my original comment/suggestion](https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/pull/7797#discussion_r2167624895) -- I won't fight for it though.

(enable-skimage2-warnings)=

## Enable skimage2-related warnings

Even before skimage2 is released, you may enable skimage2-related warnings to prepare for code changes early on.
Run the following [warnings filter](https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html#the-warnings-filter) before you use scikit-image in your code:

```python
import warnings
import skimage as ski
warnings.filterwarnings(action="default", category=ski.util.PendingSkimage2Change)
```

This will raise a warning for any piece of code which needs updating to continue working with the new (skimage2) API the exact same way it used to (in the old API).

## Updating existing code

When switching to the new namespace in version 2.0, some code will need updating to keep working as before.

:::{note}
Because these changes live in a new namespace, your code will _not_ break automatically if you don't explicitly change your imports and start importing from `skimage2`!
:::

(threshold-blob-funcs)=

### Range-preserving thresholding in `feature.blob_*` functions

**Affects:**

- {func}`skimage.feature.blob_dog`
- {func}`skimage.feature.blob_doh`
- {func}`skimage.feature.blob_log`

**Description:**

> Starting with **version 0.26**, the value range of the input `image` is always preserved.

Author: I fixed what I believe is a typo and tweaked this suggestions slightly.

> When `image` had an integer dtype, its value range was scaled -- unsigned integers to the interval [0, 1], signed integers to [-1, 1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before version 0.26, when `image` had an integer dtype, its value range was scaled -- unsigned integers to the interval [0, 1], signed integers to [-1, 1].
```
(just to be crystal clear)

This affected the now deprecated `threshold` parameter, whose absolute value would compare differently with a scaled or preserved value range.
In other words, the same `threshold` value would have different effects depending on `image.dtype`.

> With this deprecation, the new parameter `threshold_abs` is introduced.

Author: No, the `threshold_rel` parameter already existed before. `threshold_abs` is new.

> It will always be compared against a range-preserving version of `image` and behave consistently regardless of `image.dtype`.

Author: I think this comment operates under same misunderstanding as https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/pull/7797/files#r2212589347 (that this is referring to `threshold_rel`)? 

I think this sentence is correct for `threshold_abs`.

> Starting with **version 2.0** and the new `skimage2` namespace, the default values of these parameters are updated too.

Author: I kind of prefer the current sentence. I explicitly mentioned **version 2.0**. And "functions" seems weirdly unspecific when this is talking explicitly about the previously discusses parameters?

The default of `threshold` will be set to `None` and `threshold_rel` will be set to the old value of `threshold`.

> Calls to these functions that rely on default values may change behavior, so we recommend setting `threshold_abs` and `threshold_rel` explicitly.

Author: Yes, ideally both I think. Though I think the intent and effect should be discussed afterwards. I'll push a suggestion.

In **version 2.2** (or later), the old `threshold` parameter will be removed completely.

**How to update:**

To discover all calls that need to be updated, [enable skimage2-related warnings](#enable-skimage2-warnings).

> Since the old behavior dtype-specific behavior might have been unexpected, we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the old dtype-specific behavior might have been unexpected, we
```

> Since the old behavior dtype-specific behavior might have been unexpected, we

Author: It is the first suggested update strategy in the "How to update" section. I don't think it makes sense moving that section before the background description, right? So I'm not sure how I should act on your comment?

suggest setting `threshold_abs=None` and finding an appropriate relative value
for `threshold_rel`.

However, if you want to maintain the exact old behavior across all releases:

- Set `threshold_rel=None` (to ignore the new default in version 2.0).
- Set `threshold_abs` to the old value of `threshold`.

> - Wrap the input to the `image` parameter with {func}`skimage.util.img_as_float`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wrap the input `image` parameter with {func}`skimage.util.img_as_float`
```

  before passing it to the function. This will conditionally rescale the input
  range of the `image` as before depending on its dtype.

> ## Changes unrelated to skimage2

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this heading is meant to communicate?

Reviewer: It's meant to list the planned API changes, doable independent of skimage2 (cf. https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/wiki/API-changes-for-skimage2#proposed-api-changes-doable-independent-of-skimage2).

Author: I think I intended to do so when I started working on this. With the current approach I don't think it's strictly necessary. But I think it would help being more transparent about what kind of normal deprecations are coinciding with the skimage2 transition.

I'm pretty sure we are missing some that we will introduce with the next release and that will be completed after 2.0 (e.g. the `from_estimate` stuff). But I'd prefer to keep this outside this PRs's scope.

> ## Changes unrelated to skimage2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Deprecations prior to skimage2
```

Reviewer 2: Hrm, I wonder if we should have this section here. Probably best to instruct users to upgrade all the way through the 1.0 releases, and then to switch to 2.0?

We have already introduced a number of changes and deprecations to our API.
These are part of the API cleanup for skimage2 but are not breaking.
You will simply notice these as the classical deprecation warnings that you are already used to.

> We list them here, because updating your code to the new API will make it easier to transition to the skimage2 API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We list them here, because updating your code to the new API will make it easier to transition to skimage2.
```

Most changes were difficult or impossible to make using deprecations alone.
To honor the Hinsen principle (that is, never change results silently unless to fix a bug), we introduce a new package, which gives users an explicit way of upgrading.
Users also have the option to use the two versions side-by-side while they do so.

You can find a more detailed description of our motivation and discussion leading up to this in {doc}`SKIP 4 <../skips/4-transition-to-v2>`.

(enable-skimage2-warnings)=

## Enable skimage2-related warnings

Even before skimage2 is released, you may enable skimage2-related warnings to prepare for code changes early on.
Run the following [warnings filter](https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html#the-warnings-filter) before you use scikit-image in your code:

```python
import warnings
import skimage as ski
warnings.filterwarnings(action="default", category=ski.util.PendingSkimage2Change)
```

This will raise a warning for any piece of code which needs updating to continue working with the new (skimage2) API the exact same way it used to (in the old API).

## Updating existing code

> When switching to the new namespace in version 2.0, some code needs to be updated to keep working as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When switching to the new namespace in version 2.0, some code will need updating to keep working as before.
```

:::{note}
Because these changes live in a new namespace, your code will _not_ break automatically if you don't explicitly change your imports and start importing from `skimage2`!
:::

(threshold-blob-funcs)=

### Range-preserving thresholding in `feature.blob_*` functions

**Affects:**

- {func}`skimage.feature.blob_dog`
- {func}`skimage.feature.blob_doh`
- {func}`skimage.feature.blob_log`

**Description:**

> Starting with **version 0.26**, the value range of the parameter `image` is always preserved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with **version 0.26**, the value range of the input `image` is always preserved.
```
At this point, `image` is an argument, and the backticks around 'image' make it clear that it's the name of a parameter for the above-listed functions.

When `image` had an integer dtype, its value range was scaled -- unsigned integers to the interval [0, 1], signed integers to [-1, 1].

> This affected the now deprecated `threshold` parameter, whose absolute value would compare differently to a scaled or untouched value range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This affected the now deprecated `threshold` parameter, whose absolute value would compare differently with a scaled or preserved value range.
```
Keeping just one term for clarity.

> In other words, the same `threshold` value would have different effect depending on `image.dtype`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, the same `threshold` value would have different effects depending on `image.dtype`.
```

With this deprecation, the new parameter `threshold_abs` is introduced.

> It will always be compared against a range preserving version of `image` and behave consistent regardless of `image.dtype`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will always be compared against a range preserving version of `image` and behave consistent regardless of `image.dtype`.
```
```suggestion
It will always be compared against a range-preserving version of `image` and behave consistently regardless of `image.dtype`.
```

> Starting with **version 2.0** and the new `skimage2` namespace, the default values of these functions are updated too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with **version 2.0** and the new `skimage2` namespace, the default values of these parameters are updated too.
```

The default of `threshold` will be set to `None` and `threshold_rel` will be set to the old value of `threshold`.
Calls to these functions that rely on default values may change behavior, so we recommend setting `threshold_abs` and `threshold_rel` explicitly.

In **version 2.2** (or later), the old `threshold` parameter will be removed completely.

**How to update:**

We recommend setting both parameters `threshold_abs` and `threshold_rel` explicitly if you want to preserve behavior throughout the migration.
To discover all calls that need to be updated, [enable skimage2-related warnings](#enable-skimage2-warnings).
These warnings will flag code that needs to be updated and will hint at the appropriate value for `threshold_abs` for a given `image.dtype`.
Here is what the warning messages will advise:

- Remove all uses of the deprecated parameter `threshold`.

- If `image` is of floating dtype, simply set `threshold_abs` to the old value of `threshold`.

>   If `image` is of integer dtype, adjust the old value of `threshold`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If `image` is of integer dtype, set either `threshold_abs` or `threshold_rel` based on the intended value of old parameter `threshold`.
```
Right?

  ```python
  threshold_abs = threshold * scaling_factor
  ```

  and pass it to `threshold_abs`.
  For {func}`~.blob_dog` and {func}`~.blob_log`, use `scaling_factor = np.iinfo(image.dtype).max`.
  For {func}`~.blob_doh`, you need the squared version: `scaling_factor = np.iinfo(image.dtype).max ** 2`.

- Set `threshold_rel=None` explicitly if you are not passing an explicit value already.
  E.g., `blob_doh(image)` becomes `blob_doh(image, threshold_rel=None)` but `blob_doh(image, threshold_rel=0.6)` does not need to be modified.

> ## Changes un-related to skimage2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Changes unrelated to skimage2
```

scikit-image is preparing to release version 2.0 as a new package: `skimage2`.
Alongside skimage2, we will release version 1.0.0. Versions 1.x will be using the current API.
Versions 1.1.x will throw a `FutureWarning` upon import, as a means to notify users that
they should either upgrade to skimage2 or pin to version 1.0.x.

We have undertaken this to make some long-outstanding, backward-incomptible changes to the scikit-image API.
Most changes were difficult or impossible to make using deprecations alone.
To honor the Hinsen principle---that is, never change results silently, unless to fix a bug---we introduce a new package, which gives users an explicit way of upgrading.
Users also have the option to use the two versions side-by-side while they do so.

You can find a more detailed description of our motivation and discussion leading up to this in {doc}`SKIP 4 <../skips/4-transition-to-v2>`.

(enable-skimage2-warnings)=

> ## Enable skimage2 related warnings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enable skimage2-related warnings
```

Even before the release of skimage2, you can enable early warnings to prepare your code.
Run the following [warnings filter](https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html#the-warnings-filter) before you use scikit-image in your code:

```python
import warnings
import skimage as ski
warnings.filterwarnings(action="default", category=ski.util.PendingSkimage2Change)
```

> This will raise warnings for all code that needs to be updated to work as before with the new skimage2 API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will raise a warning for any piece of code which needs updating to continue working with the new (skimage2) API the exact same way it used to (in the old API).
```

## Breaking changes in skimage2

> When switching to version 2.0, the following changes would silently break or change behavior of your code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When switching to version 2.0, the following calls will either break silently or yield different results.
```
As in, function calls? But then the list needs to be a list of... function signatures? Otherwise, to keep the current format, I guess the sentence shouldn't start with "When switching to version 2.0, ..." but directly with "Version 2.0 comes with the following breaking changes ..."

Author: I made a new suggestion in https://github.com/scikit-image/scikit-image/pull/7797/commits/4bd40f3c539c8056543df1cb6368e14021be1b63.

To keep your code working as before, we have compiled the following guidelines.

:::{note}

> Because these changes live in a new namespace, your code will never break automatically if you don't explicitly start importing from `skimage2`!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because these changes live in a new namespace, your code will *not* break automatically if you don't explicitly change your imports and start importing from `skimage2`!
```
